Parallel and Distributed Computing Dr. Shajulin Benedict shajulin@iiitkottayam.ac.in www.sbenedictglobal.com Objectives The objectives of the course are to introduce the concept and the basics of parallel and distributed computing, to provide knowledge on various available parallel programming models to enable awareness on the utilization of programming models on various scientific applications www.sbenedictglobal.com Pre-requisites The participants should have prior knowledge on the following topics/courses: Computer Networks Fundaments of Programming Computer Organization www.sbenedictglobal.com Syllabus Architectures – Multi-core and Many-core architectures, Accelerators (SIMD untis -Vectorization, GPUs), Goals of parallel systems. Applications – Scientific applications, Characteristics, requirements, regular grid applications, irregular applications, data dependence, parallelization process. Parallel Programming on Shared Memory – OpenMP (C++ languages), Execution Model, Shared and private data, Directives, Barriers, Sections, Run-Time library functions, scheduling strategies, Scalability study, OpenMP for accelerator programming. Parallel Programming on Distributed Memory – MPI, Collective operations, Non- Blocking, Collectives, Process topologies, Parallel I/O, Single sided communications. Performance Tools – Concepts, Event-Model execution, profiling, tracing, types of profiling, profiling tools – Scalasca, Score-P, MPI-P, EnergyAnalyzer, Tracing tools, Autotuning – Periscope Tuning Framework. www.sbenedictglobal.com Glossary – Terminology https://www.cise.ufl.edu/research/ParallelPatterns/glos sary.htm www.sbenedictglobal.com History of Parallelism Speed is quite important for any programmers. History 1642 – Blaise Pascal's Calculating machine 1812-1832 Charles Babbage's difference engine 1853-1871 Analytical engine 1930-1940 Electro mechanical computers 1940- First electronic computer 1950s - Compact systems 1986- till date - Parallel and distributed systems www.sbenedictglobal.com History of Parallelism Drawbacks of uniprocessor systems… In a single processor system there will never be more than one running process … Slow performance… Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 …. Load is high in single core or processor – Leading to failures www.sbenedictglobal.com History of parallelism: Moore's law Moore's law of Gordon Moore (Intel Co-Founder) observes that the number of transistors in a dense integrated circuit (IC) doubles about every two years. i.e., it would double a processor's performance every couple of years. i.e., the size of processors needs to be minimized. www.sbenedictglobal.com History of parallelism: Moore's law fails… The CPU clock frequency did not increase as expected in the processor industry. Why? Heat and Power Heat dissipation is too high. Solution: Bring newer transistor technologies. www.sbenedictglobal.com Need for parallel computers It is a solution to solve Moore's law (to bring better performance every two years). Also, the requirement of software developers considering real-world scenario is to solve complex parallel problems. In short, parallelism is the future of computing. www.sbenedictglobal.com Software vs. Hardware advances Software and hardware mutually advances each other. They are tightly related each other. When software improves, hardware limitations are reached. When hardware improves, software limitations are found. For e.g., introducing multiprocessors, invited newer programming models such as MPI, OpenMP, and so forth. www.sbenedictglobal.com Different Computing – Buzz… Serial computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Cloud Computing Grid computing Mobile computing Green computing Wearable computing Supercomputing Client-server computing Personal computing Serverless computing Embedded computing Real-time computing Social computing Edge computing Fog computing HPC Quantum computing www.sbenedictglobal.com What is Parallel Computing? Parallel processing is represented as follows: Parallel computing ? Parallel computing is the use of parallel computer to reduce the time needed to solve a single computational problem. What is parallel computer? It is a multiple-processor computer system supporting parallel programming. What is parallel programming? It is a programming in a language that allows us to explicitly indicate how different portions of the computation may be executed concurrently on different processors www.sbenedictglobal.com Concurrency – How? Seeking possibilities Data dependence? Functional dependence? Can we apply pipelining? Eg. Computing partial sums in a FOR loop – P0 <- a0 – P1 <- a0 + a1 – P2 <- a0 + a1 + a2 – P3 <- a0 + a1 + a2 + a3 Concepts such as bypassing (Forwarding) or bubbling (delaying) Any other approaches? Extend compilers… Extending programming languages (serial to parallel) Creating a new parallel programming language www.sbenedictglobal.com Parallel Architectures – To Discuss Interconnection Networks Processor Arrays, Multiprocessors, and Multicomputers Commodity Cluster Flynns Taxonomy www.sbenedictglobal.com Interconnection Networks Uses of interconnection networks Connect processors to shared memory Connect processors to each other Interconnection Medium -- Types Shared medium Switched medium Different interconnection networks are utilized in different parallel machines. The interconnection network's properties influence the type of algorithm used for various machines as it affects how data is routed. www.sbenedictglobal.com Shared vs. Switched Networks www.sbenedictglobal.com Shared Medium Shared medium allows one message at a time Messages are broadcast Each processor "listens" to every message Before sending a message, a processor "listen" until medium is unused Collisions require resending of messages www.sbenedictglobal.com Switched medium Supports point-to-point messages between pairs of processors Each processor is connected to one switch Advantages over shared media Allows multiple messages to be sent simultaneously Allows scaling of the network to accommodate the increase in processors www.sbenedictglobal.com Topologies – in Switched Networks 2 Topologies: Direct and Indirect topologies Direct Topologies: Ratio of switch nodes to processor nodes is 1:1 Every switch node is connected to – 1 processor node – Or, at least 1 other switch node – Eg. Mesh networks In-direct Topologies: Ratio of switch nodes to processor nodes is greater than 1:1 Some switches simply connect to other switches. Topologies – to understand 2D Mesh; Binary Tree; Hypertree; Butterfly; Hypercube; and Shuffle- exchange www.sbenedictglobal.com 2D Mesh network examples Circles represent switches and squares represent processors… www.sbenedictglobal.com 2D Mesh Network Direct topology Switches are arranged into a 2-D lattice or grid Communication is allowed only between neighboring switches. In some cases, there is a possibility of wraparound connections (see figure b). www.sbenedictglobal.com Binary Tree Network It is an indirect topology. Each processor node is connected to a leaf of the binary tree. Less efficient in terms of Degree of Nodes. www.sbenedictglobal.com Hypertree Network Indirect topology. Better than binary tree topology. Different patterns of connections include: www.sbenedictglobal.com Parallel Computers – Classes Flynns taxonomy is the classification scheme for parallel computers. Flynns taxonomy is based on Instruction stream Data stream Single Instruction Single/Common Control unit www.sbenedictglobal.com SISD It represents the organization of a single computer containing a control unit, processor unit and a memory unit. Instructions are executed sequentially. VonNeumann Model. Not so useful… www.sbenedictglobal.com SIMD It represents an organization that includes multiple processing units under the control of a common control unit. All processors receive the same instruction from control unit but operate on different parts of the data. Why SIMD evolved? Eg. Vector… www.sbenedictglobal.com MISD It consists of a single computer containing multiple processors connected with multiple control units and a common memory unit. It is capable of processing several instructions over single data stream simultaneously. MISD structure is only of theoretical interest since no practical system has been constructed using this organization. www.sbenedictglobal.com MIMD It represents the organization which is capable of processing several programs at same time. It is the organization of a single computer containing multiple processors connected with multiple control units and a shared memory unit. The shared memory unit contains multiple modules to communicate with all processors simultaneously. Multiprocessors and multicomputer are the examples of MIMD. It fulfills the demand of large scale computations. www.sbenedictglobal.com Flynns Taxonomy https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WKXbvhkzBUo www.sbenedictglobal.com Parallel Architectures – 3 Popular ones Vector processor arrays Multiprocessors Centralized Distributed Multi- computers www.sbenedictglobal.com Vector Processor Arrays It is a vector computer implemented as a sequential computer connected to a set of identical processing elements (capable of simultaneously performing the same operation on different data). i.e., they perform computations on large arrays of data. Motivation: Many scientific applications are data parallel. The performance of applications could be heavily improved for certain applications. Simulations involving multimedia processing, Simulations such as structural engineering, aerodynamics, hydrodynamics, nuclear research, VLSI design, and so forth. www.sbenedictglobal.com Vector processor Array - Architecture It is a collection of processing elements controlled by a frontend computer (uniprocessor). www.sbenedictglobal.com Understanding Vector Processor Arrays A normal CPU A Vector processor array https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_processor NOTE: Fetching and Decoding happen only once www.sbenedictglobal.com Vectorized Code Vload vector load Vr1 vector register 1 www.sbenedictglobal.com Disadv. Of Vector Array Processors All applications do not fit to this model. Programs having conditions (Nested-if-then-else statements) produce poor efficiency. Increased code complexity needed to vectorize the data Manufacturing such processors require diligent VLSI coding – cost of such machines are high (high design cost). Processor arrays are sparsely applied in general- purpose computers. www.sbenedictglobal.com Parallel Architectures – 3 Popular ones Vector processor arrays Multiprocessors Centralized Distributed Multi- computers Asymmetrical Symmetrical www.sbenedictglobal.com Multiprocessors What is a multiprocessor? As discussed, it is a computer system in which two or more CPUs share full access to a common RAM. Two fundamental types of multiprocesors Centralized multiprocessors – All primary memory is in one place. Distributed multiprocessors – All primary memory is distributed among the processors. – Depending on shared memory, distributed multiprocessors differ. Centralized Distributed www.sbenedictglobal.com Centralized Multiprocessors A centralized multiprocessor is an extension of uniprocessors. i.e., additional CPUs are attached to the bus, All the processors share the same primary memory. Also named as … Uniform Memory Access multiprocessor (UMA) Symmetric Multiprocessor (SMP) Private data Data items used by one CPU Shared data Data used by multiple CPUs www.sbenedictglobal.com Distributed Multiprocessors Here, the primary memory is distributed among processors to form one logical address space. It increases the aggregate memory bandwidth and lowers the average memory access time. Allows greater number of processors. It is also called as non-uniform memory access (NUMA) multiprocessor Local memory access time is fast Non-local memory access time can vary… Distributed memories have one logical address space. www.sbenedictglobal.com Architecture One Logical address space… www.sbenedictglobal.com Multicomputers It is a multi-CPU computer architecture. It is a class of distributed multiprocessor without one logical shared memory. Such architecture has disjoint local address spaces. i.e., there is no global address space as like in UMA or NUMA. ie., Each processor has direct access to its own local memory. The processors interact with each other by passing messages. (MPI programming model). The switching network of such architectures should have Low-latency High bandwidth access (between processors) A good balance between the high speed processors and high speed networks is really a crucial task for multi-computers. www.sbenedictglobal.com Centralized Multiprocessors -- Issues Two problems arise while dealing with the shared data in the centralized multiprocessors Cache Coherence problem Synchronization problem www.sbenedictglobal.com Centralized Multiprocessors -- Issues Cache Coherence problem Different processors might have different values for the same memory location (for shared data) – due to caches. i.e., two processors caching different values of the same memory location. NOTE: Cache coherence problem is not possible if only one CACHE is available. Caches are expensive. Hence, individual cores get different caches. www.sbenedictglobal.com 45 Cache-coherence Problem Cache CPU A Cache CPU B Memory 7 X www.sbenedictglobal.com 46 Cache-coherence Problem CPU A CPU B Memory 7 X 7 Read from memory is not a problem. www.sbenedictglobal.com 47 Cache-coherence Problem CPU A CPU B Memory 7 X 7 7 www.sbenedictglobal.com 48 Cache-coherence Problem CPU A CPU B Memory 2 X 7 2 Write to main memory is a problem. www.sbenedictglobal.com Cache Coherence Problem -- SUMMARY How to solve the cache coherence problem? Via. Snoopy protocols. Snoopy protocols Here, the cache controller of CPUs monitors (Snoops) the bus to identify which cache blocks are requested by other CPUs. Two approaches are possible under Snoopy Protocol – Write Invalidate – Write Update Write Invalidate NOTE: Before the write occurs, all copies of the data items cached by other processors are invalidated (WRITE INVALIDATE). Write Update NOTE: Before the write occurs, all copies of the data items cached by other processors are updated 50 Write Invalidate Protocol CPU A CPU B 7 X 7 7 A cache control monitor snoops the bus to see which cache block is being requested by other processors. www.sbenedictglobal.com 51 Write Invalidate Protocol CPU A CPU B 7 X 7 7 Intent to write X Before a write can occur, all copies of data at that address are declared invalid. www.sbenedictglobal.com 52 Write Invalidate Protocol CPU A CPU B 7 X 7 Intent to write X www.sbenedictglobal.com 53 Write Invalidate Protocol CPU A CPU B X 2 2 When another processor tries to read from this location in cache, it receives a cache miss error and will have to refresh from main memory. www.sbenedictglobal.com Synchronization Problem REMEMBER: Two problems arise while dealing with the shared data in the centralized multiprocessors Cache Coherence problem Synchronization problem To solve synchronization problem, we could choose either the following: Mutual Exclusion – i.e., atmost one processor can be engaged in an activity at a time. Barrier Synchronization – i.e, a barrier point is maintained so that all processes wait at this point. www.sbenedictglobal.com Cache Coherence @ Distributed Multiprocessors Snoopy protocols would not scale well for distributed multiprocessor architectures. Hence, directory-based protocol is applied. Directory-based protocol A single directory, which contains the shared information of every cache blocks, is available. What is contained in the shared information of the directory? – A few sharing status information is available, such as, – Whether uncached? i.e., not available in any processor's cache. – Whether shared? – i.e., cached by one or more processors (and, the copy in the memory is correct. ) – Whether exclusive? – i.e., cached by exactly one processor that has written the block (so that the copy in the memory is obsolete). www.sbenedictglobal.com 56 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network Directory Local Memory Cache CPU 0 Directory Local Memory Cache CPU 1 Directory Local Memory Cache CPU 2 www.sbenedictglobal.com 57 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X U 0 0 0 Bit Vector Case 1: CPU0 reads data from the memory of CPU 2 www.sbenedictglobal.com 58 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X U 0 0 0 Read Miss www.sbenedictglobal.com 59 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 0 0 Changes bitvector to shared status www.sbenedictglobal.com 60 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 0 0 7 X www.sbenedictglobal.com 61 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 0 0 7 X Read Miss Case 2: CPU2 reads data from the memory of CPU 2 www.sbenedictglobal.com 62 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 0 1 7 X www.sbenedictglobal.com 63 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 0 1 7 X 7 X www.sbenedictglobal.com 64 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 0 1 7 X 7 X Write Miss Case 3: CPU 0 writes value 6 to the memory of CPU 2 www.sbenedictglobal.com 65 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 0 1 7 X 7 X Invalidate www.sbenedictglobal.com 66 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 7 X Caches Memories Directories X E 1 0 0 6 X Changes bitvector to exclusive status www.sbenedictglobal.com 67 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 6 X Caches Memories Directories X E 1 0 0 6 X www.sbenedictglobal.com 68 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 6 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 1 0 6 X 6 X Case 4: CPU 1 reads data from the memory of CPU 2 www.sbenedictglobal.com 69 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 6 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 1 0 6 X 6 X Write Miss Case 5: CPU2 writes data 5 to memory of CPU 2 www.sbenedictglobal.com 70 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 6 X Caches Memories Directories X S 1 1 0 6 X 6 X Invalidate www.sbenedictglobal.com 71 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 6 X Caches Memories Directories X E 0 0 1 5 X www.sbenedictglobal.com 72 Directory-based Protocol Interconnection Network CPU 0 CPU 1 CPU 2 5 X Caches Memories Directories X E 0 1 0 5 X www.sbenedictglobal.com Parallel Architectures – 3 Popular ones Vector processor arrays Multiprocessors Centralized Distributed Multi- computers Asymmetrical Symmetrical www.sbenedictglobal.com Multicomputers It is a multi-CPU distributed computer architecture. Such architecture has disjoint local address spaces. i.e., there is no global address space as like in UMA or NUMA. ie., Each processor has direct access to its own local memory. The processors interact with each other by passing messages. (MPI programming model). The switching network of such architectures should have Low-latency High bandwidth access (between processors) A good balance between the high speed processors and high speed networks is really a crucial task for multi-computers. www.sbenedictglobal.com Types Asymmetrical Multicomputers Symmetrical Multicomputers www.sbenedictglobal.com 76 Asymmetric Multicomputers Early multicomputers had an asymmetric design. Here, there is a front-end that interacts with users and I/O devices. Interacts with users and i/o devices Processors are placed in the back end. Meant for parallel computations. These backend processors run primitive operating system (specific OS which cannot be decomposed. E.g. VERTEX OS) Examples of asymmetrical multicomputers Eg. Intel iPSC and nCUBE/ten www.sbenedictglobal.com 77 Advantages The back-end processors are dedicated to parallel computations. Hence, they are easier to understand, model,or tune performance Only a simple back-end operating system is needed for all parallel computing nodes. Thus, it is easy for a vendor to establish the units. www.sbenedictglobal.com 78 Disadvantages Front-end computer is a single point of failure. Single front-end computer limits the scalability of system Primitive operating system in back-end processors makes debugging difficult Every application requires development of both front- end and back-end program www.sbenedictglobal.com 79 Symmetric Multicomputers Every computer executes the same operating system and has identical functionality. Users may log into any computer to edit or compile their programs. Any or all computers may be involved in the execution of their program. During execution of programs, every PE executes the same program. When only one PE should execute an operation, an "if" statement is used to select the PE. www.sbenedictglobal.com 80 Symmetric Multicomputers www.sbenedictglobal.com 81 Advantages It alleviates performance bottleneck caused by single front-end computer Debugging is easier Every processor executes the same program. www.sbenedictglobal.com 82 Disadvantages of Sym. MultiComputers More difficult to maintain illusion of single "parallel computer" No simple way to balance program development workload among processors More difficult to achieve high performance when multiple processes run on each processor. www.sbenedictglobal.com Multi-threading Hardware multi-threading allows multiple threads to share the functional units of a single processor. Hardware-level (registers are duplicated). Each thread would have a separate copy of register file and the PC. The memory is also shared through the virtual memory mechanisms (to support multi-programming). 2 approaches Fine-grained multi-threading – Here, the hardware suggests switching between threads after each instructions. Coarse-grained multi-threading – Here, the hardware suggests switching between threads only if specific events occur (for e.g., cache misses). www.sbenedictglobal.com Goals of parallel computing Reduce Wall Clock Time wall clock time is not the CPU time Cheapest Possible Solution Strategy many workstations cost much less then a large mainframe- style of implementation. Locality processors should be "close" to one another in terms of communication the more communication latency incurred, the longer it will run. Memory Constraints As researcher becomes more sophisticated, the complexity of problems they tackle increases proportionally. One of the first resources to get exhausted is local memory. Distributed memory helps alleviate the memory problem www.sbenedictglobal.com Performance Metrics Execution Time The serial runtime of a program is the time elapsed between the beginning and the end of its execution on a sequential computer. The parallel runtime is the time that elapses from the moment a parallel computation starts to the moment the last processing element finishes execution. We denote the serial runtime by TS and the parallel runtime by TP . Total Parallel Overhead: Total overhead of a parallel system is defined as the total time collectively spent by all the processing elements over and above that required by the fastest known sequential algorithm for solving the same problem on a single processing element. Ie.. www.sbenedictglobal.com Performance Metrics Speedup It is defined as the ratio of the time taken to solve a problem on a single processing element to the time required to solve the same problem on a parallel computer with p identical processing elements. We denote speedup by the symbol S. speedup is a number that measures the relative performance of two systems processing the same problem (Wikipedia) Efficiency Efficiency is a measure of the fraction of time for which a processing element is usefully employed; it is defined as the ratio of speedup to the number of processing elements. www.sbenedictglobal.com Performance Metrics Cost the cost of solving a problem on a parallel system is defined as the product of parallel runtime and the number of processing elements used. Cost reflects the sum of the time that each processing element spends solving the problem. Energy Consumption Energy consumed in joules while computing happens at PEs. It is dependent on the frequency of CPU utilized and the execution time. www.sbenedictglobal.com Performance metrics MIPS Million Instructions per Second MFLOPS Millions of Floating Point operations per second Utilization It is the ratio between the computation capacity used during parallel execution and the capacity that was available. www.sbenedictglobal.com